Today is Friday the 17th of November 2023 and we are in Fun at the Fair or of the Fair?
Fun of the Flair.
Fun of the Flair has been hard again.
Could you introduce yourselves?
I am Bethan Mererik-Kent and I'm Creative Director of Abicon and our Animation Group.
And I'm Rowan Alleyne with Bethan.
I'm co-founder of Kedicom Animation Group and Abicon under the umbrella of WOW, Wales
One World Film Festival.
So how did you both meet each other?
Well, I've always had a fascination with animation ever since I was a kid.
I grew up with Disney and then it gradually came to anime and Japanese animation.
And we kind of met because I wore a Sprite t-shirt since I'm a fan of My Neighbor Totoro
is my favorite Ghibli film.
And yeah, I wore the t-shirt and I'm very much confident in anime at the moment.
And like I said, I met Rowan because of a t-shirt and you were working part-time with
learning disabilities at the time?
Yeah, at the time I'd recently moved back to Cardigan, which is where I grew up in here
as well.
And I started to work for ClinV Carefob and I was supporting a gentleman who was coming
along to Gateway Clubs, which you're a key part in.
Yeah, I am.
So really we would just be there and hanging out and socializing.
And I spotted this young woman with a Totoro t-shirt on and I was like, you like Ghibli?
I like Ghibli.
And that was kind of...
Our conversation was endless.
We talked about a lot of things.
And one of the main things is because I've been going to London Comic Con and anime conventions
my teenager years.
And I always thought, why do I have to come to Comic Con in London even though I still
do it?
I still go to London Comic Con.
I just thought, why not have it here in Cardigan, my home county?
And there's a lot of buzz.
There are anime fans in Cardigan.
There's thousands of us, I think.
And so we were talking about that, weren't we?
Yeah.
And I mean, the reason I realized, well, I recognized the characters on Beth Ann's t-shirt
was because, well, A, I worked for a film festival, freelance.
And B, when I was a student, I went to Japan and I studied Japanese language and culture.
So in those days, it was probably more of a rarity to have anime fans.
Yeah, but now it's mainstream now.
It's the most popular media.
I think it's even beaten comic books and DC and stuff like that because I'm not going
into that dilemma.
That dilemma, it's just that it's mainstream now.
But it's like a real conversation starter, isn't it?
What anime do you like?
You used to ask, what music do you like?
But now these days, it's like, what anime are you into?
And then you can kind of get an idea of what level people are on, don't you?
It brings people together, doesn't it?
Yeah.
Common interest.
Yeah, but there are still people that probably see what kind of music you're into as well.
Yeah, true.
Yeah, true, true.
So yeah, we got to know each other.
It was quite gradual, wasn't it, over the course of a few months?
Yeah.
And then I think I came to Bethan with a bit of a proposal, really.
Because I heard about her ideas for Habacon.
Yeah.
And I said, well, let's see if we can do it as part of the festival.
So we made it happen.
We made it happen.
It was really joyful.
We've been doing animation for how many years now?
So that was 2018, I believe, that we started.
We must have met in 2017.
Yeah, we did.
But our first project was 2018, I think.
Yeah, our first project.
And we kept going.
Even through COVID.
Yeah, definitely through COVID.
It was like the most important thing, really, to keep it going.
Yeah.
Because the second year of Habacon was, unfortunately, we had to unfortunately cancel because we
had to do two.
Because I know a lot of my friends are disabled and who have medical problems.
And I didn't want to cause them to be severely ill.
So it was a heavy heart.
And mid of the 2020, I uploaded a video on Facebook saying that we were postponing or
I said postponing, but we really cancelled it further along the line.
Saying that we postponed Habacon because we don't want anybody to get severely sick.
But we did open Habacon early on this year.
Yeah, we did.
So we came back for our second in-person Habacon this year in 2023.
But we've been doing things throughout that time, haven't we?
We've made other films.
We've done screenings and stuff like that.
Yeah, true.
We've done screenings at Small World Theatre.
How many films have we made now?
Do you remember?
I think we made three.
And sort of some unpolished ones.
Yeah, unpolished ones.
Your most recent one was called Wild Words.
Wild Words.
We did some animation on poetry about wild animals.
Wild animals here in Wales or fictional.
I think there was a unicorn and a dragon.
And I did a bunny.
Bethan did a bunny.
We had a worm, a wriggling worm.
We had elves and voles.
What we're trying to do with our animation is to bring awareness to certain topics like
animals, the environment.
And the most, one of our probably most proudest ones was Tweeters Equally, where we talked
about our disability rights.
Yeah, and we connected it all with wider, like human rights as well.
It's obviously intersectional.
And that's something I've noticed with Abacon is that a lot of people who are, so from the
LGBTQ community, are attracted to Abacon and interested in anime.
So there's a lot of crossover.
Yeah, we're all inclusive with different types of people.
It doesn't matter if you are with a disability or you're LGBT or anything else.
Or you could be a complete norm or identifying as a norm.
Yeah.
But it doesn't matter.
And we opened with, we also catered to the old and the young.
I think we had a lot of children, some families.
And that's good because...
That's been the wonderful thing, I think.
The public facing events that we've done together.
Because Bethan obviously is creative director, center stage, but you're doing it for everybody.
Yeah, I'm doing it for everyone.
I just want people to be happy and have fun because I know how bleak the world is at the
moment.
And I just want to get them to stay cleared of the problems of the world and just have
some fun and just live, like I said in Tweeters equally.
Life is colorful and bright and we should embrace that.
Yeah.
Sure, there's going to be the cloudy judgment of reality and stuff like that and problems
and things I really don't want to get into.
And one of the examples of those sort of colorful and bright things, I think, are your costumes.
Yeah.
I am a cosplayer and I do cosplay as different anime characters.
What's your favorite one?
Oh, I was really proud recently of this, like, Whales from Italia.
And it's one of my favorites, but I realized that the anime and the fandom was dying down
because of new animes that are popping up.
But I'm into two other big anime and things at the moment, like Twisted Wonderland and
Hypnosis Mike.
But I really think that I was really proud on my costume this year and I'm really proud
to be a cosplayer.
Do you cosplay?
I think she only cosplayed once and that was Tombo from Kiki's Delivery Service at first.
Were the people at the con dress up?
Yeah, we...
Oh, yeah, I like it when people dress up.
I think I saw different types of people at our first con that I recognized from anime.
I think there was a Darby from My Hero Academia and lots of other anime characters, but it's
not just anime, it's just geeky thing in general.
Yeah, so it's one of the features of the day about the con, is the cosplay competition.
So at the end of the day, we'd announce the winners.
So that's always been lots of fun.
And you involve other people that way because people are attracted to come and cosplay,
even if they haven't been part of the group previously.
Yeah, and we have actually broadened our horizon with the animation group, because it's not
just in Carradine.
I think we have somebody in Cardiff and some people in the north.
That came about in lockdown.
So in lockdown, when we had to cancel the second Abacon, we took the money we would
have spent on that.
People generously didn't hold us to our contracts with them.
It was really nice.
And we had funding from the National Lottery and they said, you do whatever is best for
the people that you're serving.
So we decided eventually to keep going on Zoom, didn't we?
And I think it was one of the best things that we've done.
We still did it even after lockdown.
We're still doing Zoom.
It's so successful.
It's not right for everybody, but there is something I think for some people who have
difficulty in a group setting and who might sit in the corner and be quiet, can suddenly
come alive through a Zoom call.
I don't mean come alive, that sounds really derogatory, sorry.
But I mean just really seem much more confident on screen.
And that's really been something that we've picked up on.
And so we think it's worthwhile continuing with the Zooms.
But we've also returned to meeting in person because a lot of people for whom Zoom is actually
really challenging.
So we've got a bit of a balance going.
We've got a bit of a balance.
But it's meant that we can invite people from outside of Carrot's Oceans to come and be
part of it all.
And we have really talented people in our circle.
Amazing.
They're talented.
Their drawings are amazing.
We're just trying to bring them out of their shells basically.
And everybody's got a unique style.
And we've seen people even develop their styles over the course of the past few years.
Yep.
I think I'm the most improved because my drawings are getting way more better now.
What's your style, Bethan?
My style is the cute style, the kawaii style.
Yeah, 100%.
With the films that you've made already, how do you make them?
So we do a stop motion kind of style, not like with the clay kind of like or art men
or anything like that.
We usually use paper and stuff because it's much easier.
I doubt they would ever do clay.
Would we or is it way too advanced?
I don't think clay is way too advanced.
I just think we've got used to using paper.
Yeah, we've been using paper.
We did go on a claymation workshop once.
Do you remember?
Yeah, we did.
We went down to Kotatsu Festival of Japanese Animation in Cardiff.
We went on a trip down there and there was an amazing animator who came from Japan.
Then he ran the workshop and there must have been like 20, 30 people in there plus a little
group of Mencap Kerozegi'an members came down from Cardigan.
That was a really fun day.
Yeah, that was really fun.
You made some really beautiful stuff that day.
But no, we haven't done so much of it in our workshops.
If you imagine a person, then you think about all the parts that a person would move, so
their hands would move separately from their arms, from their body and their head.
You would design your character, wouldn't you?
Then you break all those bits down into individual parts to make a puppet, like a paper puppet.
You can make that move with stop motion.
They will probably stick with paper, but we might consider other methods.
Do you use an animate?
We try to keep everything as accessible as possible.
We use technology that a lot of people have these days on their iPads or their phones.
There's a couple of apps.
One is called Stop Motion Studio.
I think that's what we use.
That's what we tend to use a lot of the time.
Another one is called Flip a Clip.
Each of them have got their benefits.
Flip a Clip is a bit like a flipbook animation style.
You can draw a bit and then you can draw it slightly different on the next page and
slightly different on the next page.
It works like that.
So some of our members have started using Flip a Clip as well.
Sometimes we can combine the two and we can combine photography.
So the characters might move against a background,
which could be a painting or it could be a photograph.
We all make our own backgrounds as well and our own things.
We don't want to make anyone conform to one particular style
because everybody has their unique creative style ability.
We want it to include everybody.
So it doesn't matter if your drawing skills are different from others.
We can mash it all together and it produces something wonderful
that represents everybody who's contributed.
You can see, you know they say with the Aardmans stop motion animations,
you can see the fingerprints of the animator in the clay.
I think you can see all the personalities and characteristics of everybody in the animation
club and all the work that we've done.
Nothing is modernized at all.
No.
We don't use templates or anything like that.
What's the point of that?
It's like being everybody else and who wants to be like everybody else?
It's great that we use these methods because we get our struts are like a unique kind of
blend of different styles and different things.
Like I said, mine is the cutie style.
So I probably would, mine is really simple.
It's just probably circles and things and stuff like that.
But others are way more better.
But I don't describe them as being better.
It's different, like different styles and tastes, isn't it?
It's like some people, Matty, for example, he's got quite a dark, dry sense of humor.
Yeah.
And then there's Jamie.
Jamie is quite wacky and sort of a little bit horror inspired at times.
Yeah.
I mean, his Joker cut is amazing.
Brilliant character.
And then there's Tom.
Yeah.
Tom's got a real way with words.
So he writes a lot of the kind of poetry or sometimes writes scripts and dialogue and things.
It's bringing up the talent of the people that we are.
And some people can do digital arts like there's Sol.
Sol's amazing.
He draws everything in.
Do you remember this program called Paint?
You can get on Microsoft.
Oh, yes.
Yeah. So he uses that for his animations and they are stunning.
Yeah, they are really stunning.
They're professional.
They're really professional.
Like a jimmy painting.
Have you seen that?
It's just the way he makes these lovely smooth curves within Paint.
I just think, wow, that is just like such dedication.
And he's got a whole world of characters of his own.
Yeah.
And he's created.
Really, that's his personal strength, isn't it?
And that's what we're doing is working with people's personal strength and supporting you all to showcase them.
Yeah.
Show them all.
So do you think that there is...
So we all tell stories in different ways, but usually they follow a similar...
...structural pattern.
Do you think that people with learning disability or neurodiverse people have their own particular way of telling a story?
What do you think is influenced by stories that people...
Well, if we're trying to begin with a new project, we brainstorm of different ideas and stuff and get the opinions of the people that we're working with, don't we?
If we're going into a new project, we brainstorm of ideas, what we can do.
We just go back and forth and see everybody's opinion.
And then when we can come to an inclusion, then we go for it.
And then we work hard on it for how many months?
Yeah, it's usually over the course of three, four, five months.
Yeah.
Bit by bit, we get through the work, don't we?
We're not doing the animation club at the moment.
We're probably having a little break at the moment, aren't we?
We've had a little break since March, but we're about to begin again in January.
Yeah.
We've got just after Christmas.
But yeah, come back to the question about do people with learning disabilities tell stories differently?
Yeah, I think we do.
I mean, everybody has their own way of telling their story.
Yeah.
Some try to be extra with their stories.
And again, Tom is a perfect example of his storytelling and stuff like that.
Yeah, I think the other thing is that what we've noticed within this group is there's so much love and support for each other within the group.
And the teamwork is incredible.
You know, people take on jobs, they decide what they want to do, and then you make sure you get them done.
Yeah.
And I think that's the really like stellar thing that maybe like the rest of society.
It's not really trying. Society is just trying to be taken, trying to get the unique and making them extremely normal.
And I say to myself, who wants that? I want to be the extra kind of person.
I want to be the bright person that probably shouts out loud, well, not really because I'm a well-mannered kind of person, but you know what I mean.
But if everybody in society treats each other as well as the members of the animation club do, in my experience, then I think we do away with a lot of the issues that we have.
Like we'd be closer to each other.
We'd be less isolated.
Yeah.
You know, we'd be able to achieve things that, you know, we thought maybe we're outside of our capabilities or what people expect of us.
So I kind of think it's like a model to be held up.
I don't think I'm over exaggerating that.
I think it's real.
It's like a really wonderful community.
And it's something that I think of all the work that I've done in my life, I feel the most proud of.
And, you know.
And a great friendship has been through this between me and Rowan.
We are our business partners to the end.
Yeah.
Yeah, we've got that level of commitment to this thing.
And Hannah and Jake is also part of our little group.
And I think they say other things.
Jake, for example, is a filmmaker and he'd probably talk at length about how unique he finds the storytelling and the style.
And Hannah?
And Hannah has a wonderful visual artist.
Yeah.
Who everybody loves Hannah.
So the people mix is really interesting.
Yeah.
In this club.
So, yeah, I think for all intents and purposes, I think we have a really good thing going on.
And we'll hope what's in here.
A few more questions.
Okay.
I thought you were trying to wrap it up.
We were.
What's the first anime you ever saw?
Oh, if we have specifics, I've really remembered this.
It was in.
Okay.
Most typically, probably my first anime is like Yu-Gi-Oh or Pokemon and stuff like that.
But I really went into anime in 2007 while I was in Florida because I was obsessed with Disney for a long while.
And I still am.
I like, I love Disney.
And don't tell.
You're going to edit this, aren't you?
But don't tell this.
But I stayed up well past one of the nights that I should have.
And I stumbled across Toonami's animation block where they were airing some of the anime, animes that was on it, like Full Metal Alchemist.
And I think, I think Blood X and stuff like that and stuff like that.
And I just saw this and I said, Whoa, what is this?
And then that's how I discovered anime.
And then I realized, Oh, Pokemon and Yu-Gi-Oh are also animes.
So, yes, that's what got me into anime.
But and then I slowly developed from there with lots of other things.
And I'm a big anime fan now and I'm currently watching some animes at the moment, which are pretty good.
So, yeah, that's my taster to anime is usually Pokemon, Beyblade, Yu-Gi-Oh, stuff like that.
You're over-mockery.
I think I was, although I studied Japanese at university, I wasn't an otaku type.
But I think I was in Japan and I was doing a homestay.
And my Japanese sister with a family who I was living with, she was really into Doraemon.
Oh, Doraemon, yeah.
Who's this funny blue cat with a white face.
Oh, yeah, Doraemon.
With a helicopter hat.
And they with a Dora-yaki.
You know, like Paddington Bear always has a marmalade sandwich under his hat.
So this cat always has like a red bean pancake in its little pouch at the front.
I recently ate a Dora-yaki recently and I got a minute.
Oh, actually, no, that was a custard Dora-yaki.
It was a custard one.
Custard one.
I haven't touched the red bean paste, but I did taste the custard one.
And then the first feature was probably, oh, it was when I was in a student halls and somebody brought a copy of Mononoke Hime, Princess Mononoke.
And we watched that and it totally blew my mind.
So, yeah, like Ghibli is Ghibli as a, you know, studio.
It's such, it's got a lot of depth.
Like there are a lot of political statements and statements about the environment and the damage that we've done to it and things.
And so I think for me in the club, I can't help but bring that kind of thing in as a sort of a nod to Coreda.
Coreda. What's his name?
Can you edit that bit out, please?
Different Japanese writer.
Miyazaki.
Yeah, Miyazaki.
Yeah, I like to do Ghibli as well.
There are the serious things with Howl's Moving Castle, Princess Mononoke.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
That was me.
Yeah, Diana Wynne-Jones, amazing Welsh writer of fiction for young adults.
Yeah.
Yeah, all older teens.
And the thing is, I like Miyazaki more since I heard that he actually came to Wales during the mining strike and he actually cemented in Laputa Castle or Castle of the Sky.
There's this mining village that one of the main characters, Pardew, I think his name is.
So I think he was inspired by Welsh socialism and Wales's communities.
And you see that in his film, Laputa Castle and the Sky.
Yeah.
So that increased my respect for Haya Miyazaki because he says he loves Wales as well.
And to bind the two nations that I like the most, Japan and Wales, my birthplace and the country that I admire,
although I do realize that Japan has a few problems of their own that I will not go into really.
I wanted to ask you about Comic-Con actually.
You mentioned a good welcoming place, your Mavicon.
Yeah.
Are the other cons not so welcoming, do you think?
I wouldn't say that because I went to Comic-Con recently at the end of October and I wouldn't say it would have been unpleasant.
It's very welcoming.
There's two places in the world that I feel totally normal.
One of them is Disneyland and the other is Comic-Con.
I think it's about creating a Mavicon in West Wales, in rural Wales.
I think the point was the geographical location.
Beth, you obviously have the motivation and the resources to travel.
Yeah.
Not everybody does.
So that's why I wanted Comic-Con because not everyone will go to London or Birmingham or these other places where the big ones won't have the time, money or, lack of the words, buses and travel and stuff like that.
It's just to make it remote and to people with disabilities who can't go to the...
I'm lucky because I got an auntie in London that I could stay with.
But not everybody has an auntie in London or anything.
Not everybody stops their own Comic-Con.
The other thing about Comic-Con is unlike the other anime festivals, we're not purists in the sense of only screening in with subtitles.
There's that meme, isn't there?
Like double sub.
What would you choose?
Oh, don't I know it.
We screen the anime where there is a dubbed version.
It's dubbed into English.
I think that's important for accessibility for us.
Yeah, because we're catering to the general public and probably the general public doesn't want to read the subtitles every single time.
And plus, like I said, we have families and probably young children that probably don't want to read.
I need to be willing.
Disability might not be able to read the subtitles.
I'm able to read the subtitles because then again, I watch anime constantly every day.
But in subbed, I don't care if it's subbed or dubbed kind of thing.
So again, but I'm more catered to the people who can't read subbed all the time and young families, especially with young kids and children that probably don't want to read and just want to have a good time.
So if people say that that we're just catering to the mainstream of dubs, I would just tell them, hey, we're catering for little kids and children and families and other people with disabilities who probably don't want to read half the time.
They just want to have fun.
That's my argument.
Hey, what did you think of Panda phonics?
Oh, yeah.
Panda phonics was amazing.
I'll talk a little bit about that.
Now, Panda phonics is this guy.
I don't remember his name.
Theo.
And he makes great remixes of an anime and I think animations.
Yeah.
So it's like a VJ.
VJ kind of DJ.
He mixes his music with clips from movies and stuff like that.
And he did really well with the last app.
An absolutely amazing job to get a theatre.
Well, in that cinema, I think it's just over 100 seats.
Yeah.
And it was packed out.
Absolutely sold out.
Yeah.
And everybody is up on their feet dancing and clapping along.
It did have like Stiggy Ghibli, Pokemon, anime, stuff like that.
Yeah.
And again, it's like showcasing somebody's talents.
He's really worked hard to learn how to use the software, to take the visual mixes and the audio mixes and to get these things working together.
Yeah.
Just brilliant.
I think we can ask visitors to the exhibition.
And this is a note for Anna when she added to this to say whether they prefer dubbed or subtitled.
Yeah.
Because I know you actually.
Okay.
Have there been any depictions of people with a learning disability in any anime films, if you're aware of them?
Oh, well.
I know that there's several characters from animation that have had inklings of probably autism.
I mean, I think there was this one.
I think Spatula from Raya, the new cartoon of Raya that I'm mixing up my words.
Then She-Ra, Masters of the Universe.
Yes.
And I think Spatula, who is the mechanic, it's implied that she has autism.
I think that she has autism because she has her interests and she's not very good with communicating with people.
You know, that's kind of like a stereotype with the autistic person.
Does that depiction make you feel good that there's someone with autism on screen or does it make you feel uneasy because, like you said, it's a bit stereotypical?
I'm okay with it if they just broaden the horizon with autistic characters.
I mean, there is something called Rayman and stuff like with Dustin Hoffman that depicts as an autistic character.
I've never seen the movie and what I've heard about it is he's kind of a typical stereotype for an autistic person.
But I'm actually, can I say that something else about...
There's this character on Sesame Street that is not animated, but she has been animated in picture books and stuff, and she's fully autistic.
And I'm so proud of Sesame Street, too, aware of how autistic people are, even though Julia is on the far end of the spectrum with nonverbal communication and easy.
And she gets the...she's not very good with loud noises and she doesn't say hi.
I'm okay with that.
As an autistic person myself, I broaden the horizon of many anime characters or any person with a disability in animation.
So I was just looking up, trying to find the name of this anime that I'd seen a few years ago.
But what I remember about it was it was about the Hikikomori.
Oh yeah, Hikikomori.
So that's...and now I'm just Googling it, I actually found that there's a whole bunch of anime that feature Hikikomori.
So these are people who, for some reason or another, have decided to stay at home, usually young people.
So perhaps through some psychological problems or how society deals with them.
And it's really sad. It's really sad for the Hikikomori.
Again, I'm not bashing Japan. I love Japan. I love the culture. I love the food. I love the history of this thing.
But they do have social problems.
Yeah, so these are people who actually feel excluded, I guess.
That's why they've withdrawn or they're not accepted in mainstream Japanese culture.
Yeah, even though I praise Japan for their culture and the food and the animation,
there's stuff in Japan that I will agree that is a bit too much.
I'm only going to say this one, but the workforce in Japan is brutal.
I mean, not everyone could be a salary man, the salary person.
And they just jam, jam.
Not to say that I fully respect Japan. I'm not attacking Japan. Japan, I love you, Japan.
I support you in football and as well as Wales and stuff like that.
I will admit that Japan has their own social problems like any other country has their own social problems.
Yeah.
We'll go bring things to a close there. Thank you very much.
Thank you.